_projects/fort-worth-mens-senior-baseball-league-website.markdown, before:

---
title: "Fort Worth Men's Senior Baseball League Website"
excerpt: "I built a new website for a men's baseball league I play in using Flask, Bootstrap, etc."
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/fwmsbl.png"
---

<img src="/assets/images/fwmsbl.png" style="max-width: 800px">

## Summary
I built a new website for a men's baseball league I play in. The old site was through an overpriced service, and it offered limited customizable functionality. The new site includes...
- League standings
- A user-friendly schedule page
- The league's rules
- Each team's roster
- The location of each field where games are played
- Several necessary forms for prospective/current players to fill out

To allow the league's administrators to easily control the content (e.g. game schedule) of the site, the site pulls data from a Google Sheet that they can edit.

## Technical Details
Front end
- HTML
- JQuery
- Bootstrap

Back end
- Python packages:
    - Flask
    - Gspread

## Links
<a href="https://www.fortworthmsbl.com/" target="_blank"><i class="fa-solid fa-arrow-up-right-from-square"></i><span style="padding-left: 5px;">Link to Website</span></a>

<a href="https://github.com/peteb206/fwmsbl" target="_blank"><i class="fab fa-fw fa-github"></i><span class="label">GitHub Repository</span></a>

Commit message:

Finish Canadians in College Baseball page and small edits to other project pages

_projects/fort-worth-mens-senior-baseball-league-website.markdown, after:

---
title: "Fort Worth Men's Senior Baseball League Website"
excerpt: "I built a new website for a men's baseball league I play in. The site utilizes Flask, Bootstrap and the Google Sheets API among other technologies."
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/fwmsbl.png"
classes: wide
---

<img src="/assets/images/fwmsbl.png" class="project-title-image">

## Summary
I built a new website for a men's baseball league I play in. The old site was through an overpriced service, and it offered limited customizable functionality. The new site includes...
- League standings
- A user-friendly schedule page
- The league's rules
- Each team's roster
- The location of each field where games are played
- Several necessary forms for prospective/current players to fill out

To allow the league's administrators to easily control the content (e.g. game schedule) of the site, the site pulls data from a Google Sheet that they can edit.

## Technology
Deployment
- Vercel

Front end
- HTML
- JQuery
- Bootstrap

Back end
- Python
    - Flask
    - gspread

## Links
<a href="https://www.fortworthmsbl.com/" target="_blank"><i class="fa-solid fa-arrow-up-right-from-square"></i><span class="external-link-label">Link to Website</span></a>

For more technical details of the project, visit the<br>
<a href="https://github.com/peteb206/fwmsbl" target="_blank"><i class="fab fa-fw fa-github"></i><span class="label">GitHub Repository</span></a>
